Reminder to keep distance from marine and coastal wildlife The City reminds residents to keep a safe and respectful distance from marine and coastal wildlife at all times. The City is aware of a video of a seal at Clifton Fourth Beach being shared on social media. Read more below: 'Residents are reminded to keep their distance from marine mammals and to not interfere with them. Residents and visitors are encouraged to treat all marine and coastal wildlife with respect and to remove their pets from areas where wildlife may be present. In the interest of the safety of beach users, as well as the animals, I want to kindly request residents and visitors to keep a safe and respectful distance from these animals,' said the City's Deputy Mayor and Mayoral Committee Member for Spatial Planning and Environment, Alderman Eddie Andrews. The public are reminded to adhere to the following: - Do not approach or try and get close to any marine and coastal wildlife. Their natural response will be to defend themselves and this may result in aggressive behaviour - Always keep a respectful distance between yourself and any wildlife to reduce stress on the wildlife. Move away if approached by wildlife - Never try and touch, or pose with, any marine and coastal wildlife. This places both you and the wildlife at risk of potential harm - Keep dogs under control by keeping them on a leash and well away from all wildlife at all times. Remove pets immediately from any place where coastal wildlife are present - Never try and feed any marine and coastal wildlife - Do not support the illegal feeding of wildlife for show, such as the seals at the fishing harbours. This is an illegal activity and must not be supported financially, or otherwise In case of any injured, hurt, or coastal wildlife in distress, kindly contact the City on 021 480 7700 from a cellphone, or 107 from a landline. The appropriate response will be initiated to assist the animal. Members of the public are urged not to act on their own and without authority. Baby seal attacks kid and female at Clifton 4th Beach! 🦦Imagine hearing “get out the water” and next thing feeling a bite. I would have shat myself! 💩 pic.twitter.com/NHkZbUKwxH Issued by: Media Office, City of Cape Town, 4 January 2023