EFF condemns the callous attack on the family of PUDEMO’s national organizer and women’s league president, comrade Xolile Dlamini by the state in Eswatini  9 January 2023 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) condemns in the strongest possible terms the callous attack on the family of the People's United Democratic Movement (PUDEMO)'s National Organizer and Women's League President, comrade Xolile Dlamini by the state in eSwatini in the early hours of this morning. The attack, which saw several bullets fired at her family home through the use of military weapons is callous, senseless and inhumane. This brutal act and other attacks which have been orchestrated by the state on the same family and other pro-democracy leaders in Swaziland, reveal a level of desperation that is symptomatic of a state that has lost its legitimacy to govern over the affairs of the people of eSwatini. The unleashing of violence on people by the state can never be a solution to the complex challenges that face the people of eSwatini, as violence begets violence. When the state uses its military power and resources with impunity to quell dissenting voices in a free world, that state should no longer be regarded as a state but an organized political cartel of murderers masquerading as a state. It cannot be that the South African government remains silent when crimes against humanity are committed by a neighbouring state on people. As a country with a painful history of brutal state repression, South Africa should not be complicit and numb to the cries for freedom and democracy in eSwatini. The EFF calls on the people of eSwatini to remain united and more determined to fight for democracy and freedom despite the continued intimidation and violence of the regime. We also call for global condemnation of these heinous acts, as well as strong solidarity against the malice that is being emitted by the regime against its people. No amount of state violence and hit-squads should ever deter the people of eSwatini from pursuing freedom and civil liberties in their lifetime. Victory is certain! Issued by Sinawo Thambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 9 January 2023