ANC STATEMENT ON THE CONCLUSION AND KEY RESOLUTIONS OF THE 55TH NATIONAL ELECTIVE CONFERENCE 6 July 2023 In early hours of this morning, Friday the 6th of January 2022, we concluded the business of the 55th National Conference, which started on the 16-20th December at Nasrec in Gauteng. For the first time since the formation of our glorious movement just under 111 years ago we conducted the conclusion of our National Conference virtually on a hybrid platform with delegates converging in 9 separate hubs with the National Hub primarily hosting the newly elected National Executive Committee, the Free State Province, Leagues and Alliance Partners hosted at the lmvelo Safari Lodge in Mangaung. Our ability to embrace the digital technology as part of the fourth industrial revolution has been showcased for all to see as we led the way in fast adapting to new ways of doing things. The hybrid conference was a phenomenal success and sent a message to those within and outside our structures that interaction even on critical policy matters can be conducted and concluded remotely. We must thank the team that managed, syndicated and executed the hybrid platform throughout the 9 hubs with little or no glitches at all. We have once more proven that we are stronger together and that through hard and team work nothing is insurmountable. We concluded our conference under the theme "Defend and Advance the gains of Freedom, Unity Through Renewal". Accordingly, delegates robustly deliberated on critical tasks facing South Africa with an intention to find lasting solutions. We considered the outcomes of the 6th National Policy Conference held in July 2022, as well as the outcomes of deliberations in regions, provinces, and branches, as well as submissions from Leagues of the ANC, from Alliance partners and deliberated on the Political Report by the President, the Organisational Report, and the Treasurer General's Report. The 55th National Conference affirmed that the strategic objective of the ANC remains the resolution of the three basic and inter-related contradictions of colonialism of a special type (CST) — racial oppression, women's oppression and class super-exploitation. We seek to achieve this through the fundamental socio-economic transformation of South Africa into a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous society based on the vision, values and principles of the Freedom Charter and the Constitution of our country. Simply put, the ANC's is primarily about building a better life for all South Africans. The National Conference asserted that the democratic gains made over the first three decades of freedom should be highlighted, consolidated and defended. The narrative by the conservative and neo-liberal forces in our country that suggest that life was better under apartheid and colonialism must be rejected and rebutted by all freedom-loving and democratic-minded people in our country and in the world. We must celebrate gains such as a transformative Constitution that guarantees political, socioeconomic and other human rights; progress in the expansion of basic services and infrastructure to meet the needs of millions of people who now have access to housing, education, health, water, energy and other services; the establishment of a credible democratic political system which is based on the will of the people; institutions that function in accordance with the Constitution The newly-elected NEC will urgently address the shortcomings, setbacks, and reversals that threaten to undermine and erode these democratic gains. These include chronic poor economic performance and the resultant high rate of unemployment, poverty and inequalities; rising lawlessness, criminality and violence. The ANC-led government must move decisively to implement National Conference resolutions to end load-shedding and stabilise electricity supply. Priority must be given to speeding up the resolution of the energy crisis, in particular undertaking critical maintenance at Eskom so we return existing generation capacity to reliable service. We must transform and grow the economy so that it creates jobs and empowers Africans in particular and Blacks in general, particularly the youth, women and people who live in townships and rural areas. We must introduce new measures to cut red tape and ensure small enterprises, co-operatives and informal businesses, particularly those owned by women and young people, have effective means of raising finances, and accessing markets. The Conference called on government to prioritise unlocking the potential of the country's land for employment, rural development, food security and economic development. We must do more to bring underutilised land into production and enable the state to acquire agricultural land for purposes of distribution to previously disadvantaged persons. The Conference supported the continuation of the social relief of distress grant while government investigate the modalities and affordability of the basic income grant. The security agencies must more effectively tackle rampant crime and corruption while, the recent deployment of new police recruits, security agencies working with communities must take decisive steps to stamp out kidnapping, gender-based violence and femicide; gangsterism, the drug trade; illegal mining and the wanton vandalism of public infrastructure. It is concerning that our mission to create a non-racial, non-sexist society and democratic society has been undermined by conservative and neo-liberal forces opposed to fundamental transformation of South Africa who have been gaining confidence and expanding their zone of influence with the aim of sustaining racial and patriarchal privilege in the economy and broader society. Racism and sexism remain prevalent in all spheres of society. The conference condemned in the strongest terms possible the continued harassment of and discrimination against Black people who regularly get attacked and victimised on the basis of their skin colour. The ANC calls for the introduction of more effective instruments to combat racism which has no place in our constitutional democracy. We want our government to push ahead with the implementation of the outcomes of the state capture commission. We must also push ahead with the reforms to professionalize the public service to ensure capacity and stability in the state. Through institutions such as the national school of government and the public service commission, we must continue to recruit the best skills in society and, more importantly, recruit capable and ethical women and men to serve the people of South Africa. We must continue with the agenda for equality by ensuring that women hold leadership positions, including the LGBTQl+ community, who continue to play a critical role in development. We also believe that the state must play a significant role in realising the one plan and one vision through the district development model. In this regard, the conference declares commitment to long-term planning and makes sure that through an intergovernmental relations framework, we respond to the challenges facing the people in a focused manner as envisaged in the district development model. We reaffirmed that the cause of socio-economic transformation is taking place in a global environment characterised by contradictory tendencies in terms of human development. We will continue to work toward a multipolar world order, wherein national sovereignty and solidarity are not undermined. The conference declares that we will work with progressive forces in the world by focusing on the implementation and realisation of the goals of Agenda 2063 for the Africa we want. We believe the recently signed African Continental Free Trade Area presents an opportunity to improve trade in the continent and promote investment in critical sectors. We will work with the progressives in the world to realise the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, which include human security and peace. Accordingly, we will continue to support the struggles of the people of Western Sahara, Cuba, Venezuela, and Palestine. We will also continue to support peace efforts in war-torn countries such as the DRC, Somalia, CAR, Yemen, Syria and the peace agreement in Ethiopia. The ANC and the Alliance must act together in a decisive, empathetic and principled manner to generate hope for a more inclusive, just, equitable and sustainable future for our country. The ANC will only succeed in realising its strategic objective of transforming South Africa when it has successfully transformed itself into a renewed, responsive, modernised, well-governed, well-resourced, caring and effective political formation — the central focus of the ANC Roadmap to 2032. This means we must build an outward-looking ANC with a clear programme to serve the people. Consequently. all ANC structures have to change their focus towards the people we serve and the problems and challenges they face in their daily lives. We must build dynamic ANC branches that engage with communities, and become active in ward committees. Branch members must join community policing forums work with local law enforcement to promote safety in our communities and combat vandalism of community infrastructure. We must develop strong branches that monitor local services to prevent corruption and poor service delivery while they strengthen advice offices and contact centres for residents to access government services. We also believe that central to the renewal agenda is the quality of the membership. In this regard, we declare that we will strengthen the programme of building the New Cadre over the next ten years. We equally reaffirm the importance of compulsory introduction and political schools for all leadership collectives and public representatives. This includes attracting skilled people with abilities that can help us in our transformation agenda. We have already allowed some commissions to present on resolutions to the public through the media in the early hours of this morning and we will allow the remainder of commissions to present accordingly. As delegates to 55th National Conference, representing ANC members, Veterans League members, Women's League members, Youth League members, together with our allies Cosatu and the SACP, and a broad range of organisations who participated in our conference, remains resolute to defend and advance our democratic gains, and to continue to unite around the common goal of building a better life for all. As we concluded the 55th National Conference which was in may ways a watershed moment we committed to surge on with renewal path and unequivocally maintained that the "ANC LIVES AND THE ANC LEADS". Statement issued by the ANC Secretary General, Fikile Mbalula, 6 July 2023