Re: A statement by Pretoria News editor Mahasha Piet Rampedi on the Public Protector's decuplets report, January 5, 2023. I have studied the Tembisa 10 report released by Acting Public Protector (PP) Adv Kholeka Gcaleka on December 31, 2022. The country holds the PP's office and its reports in high regard; however, the investigation and findings by the Acting PP are deeply flawed, and have serious shortcomings. Firstly, the Acting Public Protector concluded the "investigation" without engaging the central parties or asking for any specific information from myself or my employers, Independent Media. Surprisingly, Adv Gcaleka did not bother to contact me for any information, as an interested party in the case. The report is deficient in many material aspects of the decuplets matter, which involves a complaint by Ms Moliehi "Gosiame" Sithole and her husband, Teboho Tsotetsi. The Public Protector ignored the thorough, impartial, and robust report by the renowned Acting Judge Michael Donen, who chaired an external inquiry led by experts into the matter in August 2021. A careful reading of the Acting PP looks like there was a sinister attempt to undermine the Donen Report, which the mainstream media tried to ignore. I still stand by the decuplets story, and believe that in time I will be vindicated. The Acting Public Protector's report looks like nothing but a blunt tool used to legitimise the government's previous denials and desperate cover-ups. The report looks like a further attempt to exonerate several role players, including officials, politicians and medical practitioners who were revealed to have made a number of errors pre-and post-delivery by Ms Sithole. The decuplets story was based on months of engagements and work, first-hand accounts of various sources close to Ms Sithole, including friends and relatives, who had no reason to mislead me. They all corroborated it independently from each other. The story had no sinister motive when it was investigated, validated, and written, except to share the extraordinary story with the public. Therefore, it is sad to see the story turned into a political football to further the ends of undermining my reputation and professional integrity, as well as that of my employers. The Acting Public Protector got it completely wrong. --End-- Statement issued by Mahasha Piet Rampedi, 5 January 2023 